---
title: A Place For All
author: Ruby
date: '2020-03-05'
description: Peoples place 
image: images/blog/rubi-2.jpg
tags:
- City
- Tasmajdan
type: post
---

Tasmadjan is a park catering for all.  It’s well located just out of town between the parliament and Vukov Spomenik. It has something for all seasons. A jogging path and workout area, cafes, paths, dog zones, kids’ zones, a stadium at the back and a church for when you feel spiritual.  There are green lawns with trees throughout, some large and generous offering shade in summer.  Apparently, it used to be a graveyard and has quite a history.  

The park always has people - walking swiftly, bouncing on the spot to keep warm in winter whilst their dog goes on a sniff hunt or strolling, enjoying the summer night.  There are always love birds on a park bench… oblivious to the weather, wrapped in each other and love.  On the Boulevarde side is a fenced off dog area, further in, is a giant chess game and a play pen for the kids filled with giggles, the occasional tantrum and the sighs of parents.  A restaurant backs onto the park for the more affluent.  Ice cream sellers dot the paths and mostly in Summer it hosts small festivals with stalls offering all sorts. I bought a very fetching blonde hair extension thanks to Tasmajdan - I nicknamed her Svetlana.  

The jogging track on the weekend mornings is my favourite. Pretending to be fit, I often take it on - it is more challenging than it appears - a short curvy circuit up and down hill under trees and in the open. Cafe folk can watch you sweat or cruise by. Dogs scamper next to you, chasing sticks, balls or each other as their owners catch up and gossip.  It is never too crowded, etiquette is simple and whether it’s a marathon or a swift kick start to the day, I feel free, fresh and alive there.   

I try to walk through it as often as I can, it makes me feel connected to my adopted city.  It rarely has too many people and always has enough life going on - Tasmajdan is welcoming with its walkways, sculptures and layout.   It is not that large but somehow due to a clever layout it holds a place for you to enjoy.
