---
title: My Place, Hyde Park
author: Ivana
date: '2020-03-17'
description: art and nature
image: images/blog/ivana.jpg
tags:
- City
- Park
type: post
---



Hyde park (Senjak, Topcider) is my place of choice for a relaxing walk
after work and during the weekend. It feels like an emotional reset to
spend time in a quiet green space after a day in the office. The time
I spend there is directly proportional to my good mood. I feel happy
to be a part of nature and I feel reinvigorated after some exercise.
Other people occupying the place are mostly locals taking their dogs
out for a walk or their kids to the little playground in the park.
Joggers also enjoy the park. The area is not overcrowded so they do
not disrupt the general feeling of serenity in the park.

Nature is essential to this place. I enjoy being able to see the
changing seasons. At this time, flowers are starting to bloom again.

Half of the park has been cleared and landscaped – with trees, grass,
some workout equipment and a little playground. The other half has
been left as a natural forest with a few trails crossing through.
These two parts are divided by a grand walkway lined with plane trees
(platans). The benches are mostly wooden. In general, there are not
many human interventions.

It is an open space and you can enjoy the light changing depending on
the time of the day, there are some shady parts if you need to be out
of the sun.
The materials that predominate are concrete and wood.

Fortunately, the designed elements do not dominate the natural
landscape. One element does stand out – the gates to the park which
make me wonder why there was a need to mark the entrance to a park
this way while there is no fence, not even a natural one. One would
also question the need to include works of art in the park. The few
sculptures that are left standing seem like a failed attempt to add to
the beauty of the nature around them.

The park is flanked by residential buildings, kiosks and a small shop.

I appreciate the fact that although the park is in an affluent part of
the city, landscaping interventions are not overly dominant. This
could be considered something that is unique to Belgrade. Some of the
elements of the park, such as the tree-lined avenue, resemble any
other park in any other city. In Belgrade, Hyde park compares to
Kosutnjak park but on a much smaller scale.

I would keep the park as wild and natural as possible. That is its
main advantage. On the other hand, it would be good to have a small
café on the main walkway where you can refresh yourself and meet
friends while being in nature. The benches and the walkways could use
some maintenance.

There are many cultural venues around, which include the Museum of the
History of Yugoslavia, the African Museum, the museum house of the
painter Lubarda, Vespa Museum and the House of King Petar. There is a
tour once a month organized by the African Museum of these and other
venues that represent the cultural heritage of Topcider.

The park is the city's ecological preservation area and contributes to
environmental sustainability.